Have 10 minutes for organizations
and five minutes for, uh, individuals.
Submitters can use that time, however they please.
Um, if they want to leave questions at the end,
that they're, they're more than welcome as well.
I do believe we have our first submitter
and we've got Chris.
Um, so with, with that, I'll hand over to you, Chris.
Uh, we have, we have various members
of the Health State Committee online.
Uh, we also have officials online,
and of course, this will be recorded.
Uh, and we have all already received your written
submission, so I'll hand over to you.
Now. You have 10 minutes.
Well, more than 10. Got timeline, uh, called.
So I'm here on behalf of, uh,
we're a health provider based in Whakatane.
Um, we want to say that outset that we strongly oppose.
Um, this bill, we opposed the repeal
of the health sector principles in Section nine.
We opposed the repeal of ity of Wang in Section eight.
We opposed the reduction
of the Iwi Maori Partnership Board in Section 17,
and we opposed the removal of the requirement
for TE expertise on the board in Section 12.
Also like to draw attention, uh, to the committee
that sections 9, 12, 17, 19
and 31 have been raised as being inconsistent with the Bill
of Rights as raised by the Attorney General.
Also want to draw your attention that this bill is in breach
of due process of the Waitangi Tribunal.
The Waitangi Tribunal asked
for notice from the Crown when this bill would be submitted
so they could complete their final report in time.
The notice wasn't given
and the Crown simply tabled the bill, um,
without the tribunal actually finishing the report.
Um, I am a former interim, uh,
TKA file order board member,
and so when we designed the treaty principles clause, sorry,
when we tried, uh, designed the treaty clause as well
as the health sector principles, uh,
we drew on previous tribunal claims.
We looked at the Simpson Health reforms.
We looked at research by the Health Research Council.
We even looked at the Maori Affairs Select Committee inquiry
into health inequities.
That was, uh, run in 2020.
We used this evidence to design the treaty clause
and the health sector principles, um, with the removal
of these clauses.
There's no evidence cited, there's no research cited,
there are no claims cited,
there's no tribunal findings cited.
There is no health research cited when it comes
to removal of these clause.
There are simply no evidence
and no policy framework for us to draw on
and understanding why these things have been removed.
The health principles were innovative
because what we wanted to do was create an enabling set of,
um, operational model Enabling allows, uh,
practitioners, health providers in the whole sector
to be able to, um, have ownership and drive their spaces
and being able to comm, uh,
customize the delivery in relation
to their potential positions
and roles that they have throughout the health sector.
When you en remove enabling principles
or any kind of enabling mechanism from, um, legislation,
you have to get prescriptive, prescriptive
and descriptive in relation to controlling, you know,
what is required.
This requires more compliance
and is more costly when it comes
to delivering the operational model.
We received this advice as part of the board in relation to
how these principles would actually create
a more efficient model.
And so, um, on behalf of the Puna order, we,
um, you know, oppose the removal of these principles.
Lastly, I'd like to talk about the Iwi Maori Partnership
Board and the HOA advisory committee.
These are just advisory, right?
There's no regulatory statutory, um, functions
that give them the ability to do what they need to do.
Um, there is no meaningful inclusion.
Una Otto is actually a plaintiff as part
of the high court action in relation to the disestablishment
of Taka fa order.
And this amendments to this bill
actually contradicts some of the evidence that was presented
by the Crown in relation to the changes that they made
in relation to the Disestablishment of Taka order.
They proposed that there was a plan within this amendment
bill, and that there would be powers in relation
to the Maori plan within this bill.
There is no plan within this bill.
They also spoke about, um, the need for, um, resources
and powers to be assigned across the health sector that Taka
for Takahata held.
There has been no reassignment of these powers
that Teka file order has had.
And so based on those, um, arguments that Crown Law made,
this bill is actually in contradiction
to the evidence presented within the high
court going forward.
Um, we strongly oppose, um, all the sections
that I have outlined above
and, um, argue the case that they need
to be rein reinstated going forward.
Okay. That concludes my remarks and open to any questions.
Excellent. Does anybody have any questions?
Thanks Mr. Tole for your, uh, very thoughtful submission.
That was a really interesting point.
Uh, and is it your, the last one that you made,
is it your view that the Crown's position appears to have
changed could, um, over, over time from, uh,
between the, uh, proceedings in relation to the repeal
of Taka faa
and now with this, uh, with this bill, which
as you point out, does not reassign the, uh, powers
that Taka Water had?
Yep. So the, the original argument that,
that the government
and Crown have presented is that this was, uh,
a bureaucratic exercise.
They wanted to minimize the bureaucracy of Taka water
and that, um, form wasn't required in delivering function.
That's the overarching premise
that the Crown has argued in relation to Disestablishing
and in arguing that they had, um, made the claim
that there was no loss in FTE
or resources that that had simply been reassigned
to the order or other parts of the system,
that all the different plans
or the initiatives
that AKA order had established had been reassigned
to other parts of the system.
That all the statutory
and regulatory powers that aka file order had,
had been reassigned to other parts of the system.
And so their position was, is that, you know, it was, um,
just a, a normal change of the machinery of government,
you know, giving expression to, you know, delivering, um,
a Maori plan, right, in relation to how they they saw fit.
But if you actually look through the bill
as I've just itemized, none of that has actually passed
through to other parts of the system.
Thank you. Excellent.
Well, Chris, thank you very much for, for your submission.
Um, and thank you for taking the time to come
and speak to the healthly committee on it.
So we'll now move to our next submitter, which is Tim.
Uh, Tim. Tim, sorry, Tim Benzel, um, who, Tim, welcome
to the HEALTHLY committee.
Um, I don't know how long you've been watching,
but we have received your written submission, um,
and we do have various members
of the Health Select Committee online,
and also we have, um, our officials online as well.
So we've allocated five minutes for your submission.
Um, I'll hand over that time to you now.
Thank you, Hamish. Um, Koto, um, I'd like
to thank the Health Select Committee for the opportunity
to make an oral submission on the PIORA
Healthy Futures Amendment.
Bill. I'm a professor of health policy at the Faculty
of Medical and Health Sciences at the University
of Auckland, and since 2010, part
of my research has been on the implementation
of health targets.
And in this submission, I want to oppose the amendment
to section 36
that embeds targets in gov in the
government policy statement.
And I am oppose the inclusion
of third section 36 A specifying the subject
matter of these targets.
Health targets are a means to achieve a policy objective,
and they have well-known advantages and disadvantages.
Some targets are clearly beneficial, such
as the current target for child immunization,
but many target indicators do not adequately stand for
what we want them to stand for.
Despite the best efforts of those, designing them
two decades of research into health target implementation in
New Zealand and elsewhere show
that they often promote behavior that hits the target,
but misses the point.
Perverse incentives
and unintended consequences such as gaming
and cheating take root when clinicians
and managers reach the limit
of improvement within their control.
And when this happens, particularly when resources are
constrained, target achievement is prioritized over
quality clinical practice.
Any government is entitled
to judge whether health targets are a suitable means
for improving health service delivery.
But it's a mistake to require future governments
to adopt this policy instrument when they may judge the pros
and cons differently.
I also want to argue against the increases in executive
and ministerial control over Health New Zealand
that are contained across clauses
11, 18, 26, 27, 29,
and 33 of the clause by clause analysis
taken together, these increase the likelihood that present
and future governments become insulated from advice they do
not necessarily want to hear.
I'm very concerned
that New Zealand's political system has few checks on the
power of ministers and cabinet compared
to most well-functioning democracies.
The amendment bill further strengthens the power
of the executive over the publicly funded health sector in
ways that are not needed or appropriate.
Increased executive power will most likely lead
to shortsighted and partisan policy making
and will not be a recipe for a stable,
resilient health system dealing
with the multiple challenges it faces in the future.
So thank you. I'm happy to take your questions.
Excellent. We have some time
for a quick question. Uh, Ingrid,
Thank you for your submissions.
You've talked about the problems with targets
in this particular bill, there seems to be a lack of, uh,
focus on equity and accessibility.
Can you just talk us through
what the unintended consequences might be in that context
of the prescribed targets as they currently stand?
Yeah, thank you, Ingrid.
Um, it's a, it varies I think a according to targets.
Um, I think in, in a lot of the waiting time targets,
what targets will do is encourage clinicians
to focus on the easier to treat
and less on the harder to treat.
Because treating the harder to treat will take more time and
therefore jeopardize their capacity to meet the target.
Uh, I think in the immunization case, um,
you can't meet the target without dealing with inequities.
Brilliant. Excellent. Thank, thank you, Tim,
for your submission and thank you for taking the time
to come and submit to the Health Select Committee.
Um, we'll now move on to our next submitter.
Uh, I do believe we have Mo Edwards, um, online.
Welcome to the Health Select Committee. I'm Ham Campbell.
I'm chairing the sub, uh, committee.
Um, we have allocated five minutes to your submission.
I do just note that, um,
in our reading pack we only actually had a one line which
said, I recommend the bill be rejected in its entirety
as per my written submitted submission in the attached file.
We will chase up to make sure we get that full,
um, that full document.
But currently at this stage,
this is the information we've received.
Um, I'll hand over to you now.
Oh, more.
I come before you today as educator
currently completing my doctorate at the,
thank you for the opportunity to speak today on this bill.
I'm sorry you didn't obviously get my full submission.
Um, we, we will make sure we chase it up.
Alright, well rather than speak directly to that anyway,
I'm going to touch on some of the key points from that.
First of all, the minister's narrative
and the reality do not align.
The minister says this bill will strengthen Maori voices
and ensure the health system reflects Maori perspectives.
But the regulatory impact statement itself concedes
that any improvement will likely be marginal
and only if Health New Zealand chooses
to give effect to Maori voices.
That is not a guarantee of meaningful partnership.
It is a lowering of expectations.
Two, consultation has been inadequate.
The quality assurance statement makes clear
that col consultation was limited.
Actually the word was inadequate
and confined to the Mo Maori advisory committee, HAC.
There was no meaningful engagement
with Iwi Maori partnership boards, the statutory mechanism
for reflecting local Maori perspectives.
If Maori voices are sidelined at the very stage when
legislation is being shaped, how can we trust
that they will be heard in practice once this bill is
passed, if it is passed the bill risk weakening,
not strengthening ity obligations while framed
as streamlining and clarifying roles, the changes in reality
reduces the visibility
and weight of Maori roles within the system.
It may look like an elevation of advisory roles,
but the substance is a narrowing of power and influence.
This is a step backwards returning us to the very structures
that have failed Maori health for generations.
The bill seeks to strip away treaty related provisions from
the ACT provisions that require Maori expertise
and cultural competency at decision making levels.
Removing these clauses is not streamlining, it is erasure
erasure of commitments to equity, erasure
of Maori participation
and erasure of itself from the heart of the health system,
and ultimately all other systems.
What the treaty principles bill failed to do.
This bill is attempting like a wolf in sheep's
clothing for clothing.
Let's not disguise that this is not just about governance,
it is about outcomes.
We know from the Waitangi tribunals how report
and decades of evidence
that Maori experienced the poorest house
outcomes in this country.
Every reform
therefore must be judged against whether it
changes that reality.
If Maori voices are weakened, inequities will persist.
If partnership is reduced
to consultation on the Crown's terms,
the system will continue to fail.
So in closing, my submission is simple.
This bill, as it stands,
undermines the crown's obligations under
true partnership requires robust Maori voices at every
level of the health system.
Not marginal improvements left to the discretion
of Health New Zealand, the very organization
that has failed Maori for years,
for generation, for decades.
This bill is racist and breach.
My strong recommendation is
that the committee reject this bill.
Failing that I urge this committee
to support the recommendations put forward yesterday by Dr.
Matt Wheeler of the rural Australian College of Physicians,
and to ensure that Maori voices are not
diminished, but strengthened.
Because without that, there can be no healthy future
for Kiara.
Excellent. Thank, thank you very much.
And we have, um, now received your, your full submission.
So we will go over that, um, as well.
So thank thank you very much for taking the time
for both your written and oral oral submission.
We do, we do do appreciate that.
Um, so with, uh, with that, we'll now move on
to our next submitter, who is Tanya Wilton.
Um, do we have Tanya online?
Uh, Kira. Good morning, Nia Wilson.
Uh, I'm an emergency physician working at Heart Hospital
and I've been working there for 17 years
and I thank you for this opportunity to speak
to my submission on the PIORA Amendment bill.
And I hope to provide a perspective from
a clinical point of view.
The stated objective of the amendment bill is
to improve the effectiveness
of health service delivery to patients.
And as a frontline clinician, I support this objective.
However, I see little evidence
that this bill has been crafted
with the stated objective at the forefront,
and I don't believe it will achieve its stated objective.
My three main concerns are, number one,
the impact on effective health delivery
and outcomes for Maori.
Number two, the promotion of privatization of healthcare
and subsequent impacts,
and three erosion of measures
to retain current healthcare workforce.
I object to the clause renaming the PAA Healthy Futures Act
with the English ahead of Tere.
I find this petty offensive
and emblematic of the reductionist evidence free approach
that seems to have been taken.
So effective deliveries of service
for Maori will the proposed amendments address the
overwhelming evidence of inferior health outcomes for Maori.
When I'm at work, I see
and treat a greater proportion of Maori patients,
then live in my community
and general Maori patients have greater health needs.
So how can my team and I be supported to provide equitable
and excellent care for our patients?
The environment and emergency medicine is a system
that has had little input from Maori and design or delivery.
Currently we have one who provides support
for inpatient wards as well as the 12,000 Maori patients
that come through our emergency department annually.
If our only worked in ED and never had a lunch
or toilet break, she would need
to support six patients an hour every hour just
to get through our patients.
If anything, our system needs greater systematic input from
Maori repealing the health sector principles.
Um, amending Section 12, reducing the requirement
for health governance structures to have understanding of
or Ang or Tik Maori.
This shows a disregard for the importance of te
and of partnership and demonstrates a lack of understanding
as the benefits that advocacy
and knowledge in Tik Maori at all levels in
healthcare can deliver.
And then further amendments
to sections 12 15 29 13 93 systematically downgrade the
expectations of Health New Zealand to provide systems
and support to engage Iwi Maori partnership boards,
thus keeping another source of knowledge
and expertise at arms length.
How is this gonna help me to deliver effective
and appropriate frontline health service?
Um, my second objection is the explicit
inclusion of private healthcare.
To my knowledge, there is no credible data
that has shown privatization will deliver the stated desired
objective to improve the effectiveness
of health service delivery to patients.
Conversely, it has been shown to drive up cost
and reduce the efficiency of healthcare provision.
Um, privatization also potentially increases acute
public workload.
I've cared for several patients this year
that have had complications related
to procedures they underwent in private facilities
once discharged.
And when things go wrong,
these patients cannot access support
or care from the private facility
and have required critical care in the public health system.
And the situation is made more complex by a lack of access
to private clinical records for clinicians.
My third objection is the removal of measures
to retain the health workforce in the midst
of a workforce crisis in my department.
We currently have half the medical workforce
that is recommended by our Australasian College
of Emergency Medicine.
The current, uh, New Zealand Health Workforce Plan has only
two action points to retain, to address re retain retention
of the workforce and quote, uh,
make out organizational cultural commitments
to health New Zealand staff, such
as in the New Zealand Health Charter real for our people
and to improve the leadership
and experience of work for our staff.
So one of these levers,
the New Zealand Health Charter is being repealed.
What does this signal to the healthcare workforce?
Um, in addition, the amendment to clause
or the addition of Clause 11, a, um, obligation
of crown agent to be politically neutral.
Um, earlier this year, medical specialists speaking out
for public health measures.
We are publicly ridiculed by members of parliament.
Uh, will the addition of this clause mean
that any healthcare worker who raises the head
above the parapet and speaks out will be subjective?
Subjective not only
to potentially unprofessional public ridicule,
but also to punitive employment measures.
So in summary, I do not support the majority
of proposed amendments contained with within the spill
for the reasons I've outlined.
Excellent. Thank you. Um, Tanya,
you have hit five minutes.
Exactly. Um, so you've obviously,
obviously time timed that very well. So we thank Can
I ask one quick question, Mr. Chair?
Uh, no, it's very quick.
We, we have gone over five minutes, so just wanted
To know whether you had experienced we
We move on, uh, to the next submitter.
Thank, thank you very much with where
The frontline roles have been filled or not?
No. Uh, we, we have reached our, our five minutes.
So we'll now move to our next submitter,
which is Emily Gill.
Um, Emily, welcome to to the Health Select Committee.
I'm Hamish Campbell. I'm chairing this,
the sub subcommittee.
Um, I don't how long you've been online,
but uh, we have allocated five minutes for your submission.
Um, you can use that five minutes as you please.
Uh, we do have your, your written submission in front of us.
Um, so I'll hand over to you. Now,
Was that to me, Emily?
Yes. Brilliant. I I was asked to join.
So it just took a couple of seconds.
Rural GP serving the remote RO
on the east coast of the North island
where par patients live two hours from the nearest pharmacy
and three hours from the nearest hospital in Ani.
And in answer to the last question, yes,
we've already lost a staff at our remote community.
To summarize for my written submission,
I reject this amendment utterly for all the great reasons
outlined by countless experts failing that
and amendment that should be considered is
to add high quality to section 36 af.
Surely we can all agree to that access
to high quality primary care.
So I submit, I submit this next video to illustrate the life
and death importance of high quality primary care
based on continuity of care.
Tonga. This is the reason I have remained at the same rural
GP clinic for more than a decade, despite all the failings
of our health system that understandably have driven many
of my colleagues away after this video.
I welcome your questions. Nu
um, actually, I asked for this to be a shared video content
and I've not been able to share for video sharing,
so I'm worried that you're not gonna hear the,
um, audio visual.
And I did email several times about this.
I even offered to submit the video in advance.
Um, I'll just get some advice from, from the clerks.
Just hang on.
I need to have optimized.
Can you see a share button, Emily?
Correct. But I, it's blackout has been blacked out
for optimize for video sharing.
So I worry that if I share you won't hear the video,
Just make sure to activate audio and video
and it should be fine.
Can you that, that Just try.
I am trying and oh, oh, you've just changed it. Brilliant.
Thank you. Thanks.
Uh, has shown very clearly that continuity
of care is associated with lower mortality rates
and this holds true across cultural boundaries,
um, in countries.
So I'm gonna ask you, and again,
another question I'm gonna ask you
to commit yourself in the chat.
What do you think, have you been with the same GP
for 15 years?
How much do you think this changes your risk of death?
Do you think it might reduce it
by nothing compared to one year?
5%, 10%,
or 25%?
So compared to if you've been with your GP for one year,
if you've been with the same GP for 15 years,
this reduces your risk of death by 25%.
Again, that is an extraordinary effect size
and I'm gonna show you an image of that
'cause it is just so striking.
So this is a study done by a Scandinavian group
of over 5 million people.
So the whole country. And it showed
that the longer you've been with a gp,
the more light you are to live longer, to stay out
of hospital and to need urgent care.
I'm open to questions
that video link I have submitted to the committee
for it's an hour long video, which I urge all of you
to explore 'cause it is full of evidence-based, um,
information on what is high quality primary care.
Primary care without high quality is a waste of money.
People will die.
Excellent. Thank, thank you very much for time
and your persistence
and making sure that we could see that clip
of video really do, do, do appreciate it.
Um, we, there's, there's no further questions.
So we will move on to our next, next submitter. Um, well,
Well, I know if I have a, if I have a few,
if I have a few more minutes,
I will keep on speaking. I just, you
Have, you have question. Have about
30 seconds, 30 seconds maximum.
So what I will say then is there is a difference
between contact and continuity of care.
The focus on just privatized telehealth at might
increase co uh, contact and access,
but it doesn't improve continuity of care.
That is key.
Excellent. Th thank thank you very much, uh, for, for, for
that, for that edition.
Uh, we now we'll move on to our next submitter, um,
Neville Robertson.
Um, Neville, I see that you are online.
Um, you've probably been been watching along.
We have allocated, uh, five minutes
for, for your submission.
You can use that five minutes as you please.
We have received your written, written submission.
Uh, we have that in front of us.
Um, so I'll hand over the five minutes to you now.
Thank you. Uh, Dr. Campbell,
I'm speaking from a community psychology, uh,
perspective here, and I have four points.
The first is about equity.
It seems to me a very unfortunate thing to take equity out
of, uh, uh, by the repeal of section seven.
I think it's not good enough to have a health system
that entrenches current disadvantages and marginalizations.
Um, it's a waste of money. It is unethical.
Um, and I think it's frankly, uh, a racist ableist,
uh, homophobic, cisgendered name.
All of those things, if we are content to say, well,
you people are just going to get an inferior services.
Okay, I think that is, um, extremely unfortunate.
I'm really concerned about the abandonment
i population health and prevention and health promotion.
It is a truism
and it's backed by lots of research
that it's much more effective
and much cheaper to build fences at tops
of cliffs rather than having ambulances at the bottom.
There are lots of things that we can easily do.
Glue air that is, um, inherent in a lot of, uh,
in the background of a lot of young men
who end up in prison.
Um, oral poor oral health, which can lead to heart disease.
Um, housing, we need to put much more emphasis on housing.
Now, I'm not suggesting that health professionals need
to be building houses, but I am suggesting
that it's really important to have that link
between the expertise of health
and health researchers
to help inform those other policy areas.
Previous speakers have talked about their concern about the
rii and Maori, I won't amplify on that.
I just thoroughly, uh, support their comments.
Cultural competence has gone now.
Psychology is a really interesting exercise, uh, ex exemplar
of how one can make a difference.
When I started in this field, psychology was,
I think could be fairly described
as a white supremacist discipline.
It was, uh,
thoroughly embedded in a white view of the world.
It did not have the skills
and the knowledge base to engage
with a wider range of people.
And over the years, we've made quite a lot of advances
to turn out a, uh, be able to now turn out, um, culturally
competent psychologists to recruit
and train psychologists from a much wider background so
that they match the, the, um, populations
that they are serving to remove
that is a 50 year step backwards.
I'll take your questions.
Ingrid. You have, uh,
been quite damning in your comments.
We've heard from previous submitters a concern about a move
to privatization.
What is your reading of the bill
and do you have any views on that?
I think we are being softened up to have a
entirely privatized system of health.
We just need to look at the United States
to see what happens there.
Um, Americans spend far more than anybody else on health
when it look, when you look at life expectancy,
they're ranked 48th.
That is not a way
to conduct a health system in a civilized society.
Excellent. Well, I don't see any further questions.
So Neville, thank you for taking the time
for both your written and oral submission.
I really appreciate you putting the effort in to come
and express your views on this bill.
Um, so thank you. Thank you very much.
Uh, we now will move to our next submitter who thank you
For the opportunity.
You're more than welcome. We are now moving
to our next submitter, which is the Royal Australian
and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.
Excellent. I do believe we have Susan with us. Susan.
I'm Hamish Campbell. I'm chairing the
Subcommittee of Health Select Committee.
We have allocated 10 minutes to your submission.
We have already received your written submission.
Um, so I'll hand over that 10 minutes to you now.
Kira, uh, committee members, um, I'm Sue Fleming,
New Zealand Vice President for Rand Cog.
And with me is, um, PE Kepe, who's the chair of the Rand
RO in New Zealand committee.
We represent the obstetricians
and gynecologists across Australia who are dedicated
to excellence in equity in women's health.
We see preventable deaths every day in our practice.
Maori women, for example, our 2.4 times more likely
to die from pregnancy related causes.
They experience higher rates of cervical cancer
and pregnancy complications.
These are not statistics to us.
These are our patients, our hanau preventable outcomes.
Rands Cog strongly opposes this bill
because it will worsen the very health inequities it claims
to address while driving away the clinicians
and specialists needed to solve them.
We have three critical concerns that we wish
to address in this presentation.
Our first is the diminished focus on equity
and Maori health that will follow removal
of the health sector principles,
dismantling Maori partnerships
and reducing iwi Maori partnership board functions.
This is not about semantics.
This is about undermining systematic attention
to documented disparities.
In obstetrics. We know that culturally unsafe care
directly contributes to poor outcomes.
Maori women delay seeking care
when they anticipate discrimination
require removing requirements for cultural safety.
Training and expertise means more preventable
complications, more maternal deaths
We've seen in this country that Copa Maori approaches
like community LED HPV self-testing programs
can dramatically improve screening rates
for at risk Maori women.
This bill removes the very framework that enables
and drives culturally responsive care.
I'd now like to hand over to, um,
Committee members.
Our second concern is the plan
to embed fixed performance targets in legislation.
Performance targets have a checkered history
and risk gaming at the expense of patient care.
UK experience shows the dangers A
and e targets led to ambulances queuing outside hospitals
to avoid breaching time limits.
Cancer targets created perverse incentives
to refer low risk patients, while complex cases weighted
for women's health, specifically surgical targets,
divert resources from family planning, preventive care,
and complex cases requiring longer treatment.
We will hit targets while missing.
The bigger picture of women's health.
Targets must be flexible
and responsible to current underperformance
not locked in legislation.
More critically processed
and time-based targets alone are in, uh, insufficient.
We implore you to embed in this legislation a responsibility
to measure meaningful health outcomes.
Contraceptive failure rates, surgical complications,
satisfaction rates, and quality of life measures
for conditions like pelvic pain and incontinence.
As clinicians, we need to know whether our care
actually improves patient's health, not just
how quickly they move through the system.
This outcome information is largely missing in New Zealand.
In my own department, clinicians are desperate
to understand the impact of their care,
but we lack the systems to collect this critical data.
Here's the difference. Reducing postoperative pain,
blood loss, and improving nutrition leads
to genuinely faster recovery and quicker return to work.
Simply discharging patients earlier without improving
care does not.
International evidence shows that clinician led
learning from outcomes improves health, increases efficiency
and reduces costs.
Please let us do this in our Toyota and New Zealand too.
And now back to you, sir.
Thank you, Pelle. Our final concern is
that this bill will create an environment
that will a adversely affect the ability
and willingness of clinicians to work in New Zealand.
Clause 11 creates an impossible conflict for doctors.
It requires us to be politically neutral.
While our professional ethics demand, we put patients first.
For example, when a gynecologist identifies
that a cervical screening program
is failing Maori women in their district,
speaking up becomes a choice between professional ethics
and employment law.
The medical council is clear.
Our primary duty is to our patients and public health.
This legislation forces clinicians to choose
between keeping their jobs and keeping patients safe.
The health charter removal eliminates workplace safety
protections at a time when 70%
of our RT OA members report experiencing discrimination,
bullying, and sexual harassment in the workplace.
This is statistically worse than Australia,
where our colleagues are increasingly heading.
Every specialist who leaves for Australia
represents a multimillion dollar training investment
that's lost, and we are already losing
valuable clinicians at an unacceptable rate.
In summary, let me be clear about
what this bill means for our patients.
Maori women will continue dying at preventable rates
because we've eliminated systematic approaches
to addressing disparities.
Complex cases will be deprioritized in favor of friendly,
target friendly procedures,
and preventative care will suffer as resources.
Chase narrow metrics experienced clinicians will leave
for jurisdictions that value their professional expertise.
We therefore urge you to reject this bill entirely.
If reform is inevitable, we recommend
that the bill preserves a focus on equity,
focuses on outcomes, not just targets
and maintains strong independent clinical voice by removing
clause eleven's political neutrality requirement.
And that prior to making changes,
there's meaningful consultation.
This rushed process prevents proper engagement
with affected communities.
In conclusion, committee members, we are here not
as political advocates.
We're here as clinicians who see the consequences
of policy decisions in our clinics, our operating theaters,
and our delivery suites.
This bill trades evidence-based improvement
for political messaging.
It replaces clinical expertise with bureaucratic targets,
and most tragically,
it abandons New Zealand's most vulnerable patients when they
need systematic support.
Most the path to better health outcomes
runs through clinical expertise, genuine partnership
and evidence-based equity measures not around them.
Thank you for your attention
and we'd be happy to answer a question if time, time allows.
Excellent. Thank you. We do have time for some questions
and I'll take the chair's prerogative
with, with going first.
Um, how many members do you have in, in New Zealand
and how have you consulted with them on this,
on this proposal?
Uh, on this submission?
Um, and how, how was that, um,
informed, informed your submission?
That's a very good question.
Um, we have, um, approximately 250 members
in, uh, New Zealand.
Um, something over 2000, um, in Australia.
We have, um, deep connections with our, with our members.
Um, we visit, um,
clinical services regularly.
We have a forum of clinical directors across New Zealand.
Um, and we have a committee, a hay HA committee,
which is focused on, um, equity issues.
And, um, Maori clinicians thriving within our, um, segment.
We would've liked the opportunity to engage more deeply,
but the timeframe around this consultation in the context of
multiple consultations, flooding our desks, um,
have limited the opportunity for the level
of consultation we would ideally have liked.
So, so there hasn't been the level of consultation
with your members as you would've liked?
Yes. I mean, we have put our submission out.
Yeah, we, we, i, we just move to, I shared
'cause we are running out of time.
Uh, thanks Dr. Fleming,
and you're well within your rights to remind the chair
that this bill did not go
through the usual government consultation process
and departmental consultation process
before it came to a highly shortened
select committee process.
Uh, I want to ask about, um, can you please explain
for the committee why public service neutrality should not
apply to your members, uh, specialists
and obstetrics and gynecology?
Because clearly principles
of public sector neutrality should apply to public servants.
What's the difference?
So, um, as, as clinicians, we are not simply employees.
Certainly we have responsibilities as, as employees,
but if, um, using channels
that are available within the health system we operate,
are not able to, uh, respond to our concerns,
then we have a, a moral
and ethical obligation to speak up.
For example, the recent speaking up
that occurred in the Nelson, um, Marlborough district, um,
was, was, um, precipitated by deep concern
of clinicians around their ability to deliver care
to their population.
And having exhausted all measures, they were forced to, um,
to speak up publicly.
And that has resulted in attention
to the waiting times in that area.
Excellent. Thank, thank you. We have,
we have gone over time.
Um, so we do need to now move on to our next,
next submitter.
Uh, appreciate the time you both have taken to come
before the committee today, um,
and to thank your organization for,
for their written submission.
Uh, we will now move on to our next submitter,
which is Simon O'Neill.
Simon, um, as you may have, um,
may have been online for a while.
I'm Hamish Campbell. I'm chairing the Subcommittee
of Health Select Committee.
Um, we have your written submission, um,
and we have allocated five minutes
for your oral, oral submission.
Um, I'll hand that time over to you now.
Hey, no, uh, thank you Hamish.
Um, I'll, I'll, I'll be really brief on this.
Um, my submission's brief. Um, I don't oppose this bill.
I work in primary healthcare in the king country, uh,
and nui and, um, especially
these communities, um, among some
of the most vulnerable I've ever worked in.
I've worked all around the world, um, in all sorts
of communities, all sorts of lifestyles.
And it was only when I came back to New Zealand
and started working in healthcare here,
it really drove it home how vulnerable some
of our communities are, how disadvantaged they are.
Um, I understand where a lot
of people are coming from saying that our relationship
with the treaty is outdated, it's historic,
and we need to just treat everybody the same.
But that's kind of what we've been doing
for the last a hundred years and it's not been working.
Um, and I think the, one of the reasons I'm opposed to any
of these changes, or I'm opposed to any change
that weaken our relationship with the treaty, um,
and our, our responsibilities
and obligations to actually
adopt it as one of our f
or as our primary founding, um, document,
um, this legislation.
I mean, even the name changing, um, it just feels like it,
it's, it's really, really anti Maori.
Um, and I'm not, I'm as white as you can get.
I'm Irish Scottish, uh, going back five generations.
Um, but I'm also a New Zealander
and I think the trees, one of the things that makes us, uh,
new Zealanders, we are not a little outpost of the,
the commonwealth of the empire anymore.
We are New Zealand. We're a
and we need
to stop just weakening our relationship with the treaty.
Um, I've worked for Dock up here in Tonga National Park, um,
and one of the things that surprised me was
every time we have a treaty settlement go through
and another iwi gets to work or,
or closer with the inside the park
and start to inflict changes on it, those changes are good.
They're things we've wanted to do for a long time
and healthcare is no different.
Um, so really my bottom line is I don't,
I I don't support these changes.
I oppose them. And I would really like to see
all our legislation get on board with the treaty
and fulfill our responsibilities
and obligations that we made in 1840.
Thank you. That's all I've got.
Excellent. Thanks. Thank you Simon, for, for that, uh, uh,
concise, uh, submission.
Um, does any, uh, members have any questions?
No, it doesn't appear to be any questions.
Um, but don't, don't worry, Simon.
Um, we do have officials online.
We've received your written submission.
Um, so don't take that to sign of,
of anything it has has been, has been received.
So thank, thank you.
Thank you very much, uh,
for taking the time for both your written.
Yeah, thanks very much.
Um, Janette, it appears that we have lost Hamish,
would you like to take over while he Yeah,
Yeah, I can do. Thank, thank
you. Um, apologies seem to have, uh,
frozen Dr. Campbell in time.
Uh, so we now move to our next submitter.
Uh, uh, thank you very much,
uh, for your submission and you've got 10 minutes
your time starts now.
Thank you.
I'm here today as the chair of the
partnership board representing UA
and awa, who's hide,
stretch across the title currents of ua.
And importantly, where parliament stands today is on the UA
of the very iwi I represent.
I want to begin with some words from
my great-great-grandfather.
We like you all a parliamentarian, albeit in the 18 hundreds
and famous for the versus the Bishop of Wellington case.
He said, Ana, listen to the sound
of the crashing waves.
The sentiment behind this is about the importance
of listening to the corridor of the tides
and the voices of our people.
Our IMPB belief.
Now is the time for us to all to be listening.
Let me paint two pictures for you
that demonstrate the realities
that different communities face across our region
of over 463,000 residents
and one community families have no vape
shops on their walk to school.
There is just one bottle store
and GP clinics that are enrolling new patients.
The median household income there is 198,000 fewer than 8%
of the residents of Maori.
Most people are aged over 30
and more people own their homes.
This is a Decal 10 neighborhood in another community.
There are multiple vape shops near bus stops to schools,
three bottle stores, dairy selling alcohol,
and the local medical center is close to new enrollments.
The nearest GP is a 90 minute walkaway.
More people rent there than own the median household income.
There is just $81,000, one in three residents of Maori,
and there are many more children.
And under tahi, under the age of 21,
almost 50% of those houses here are cold,
damp and Maori.
This is a decal one neighborhood.
These two scenarios are 20 minutes
drive away from each other.
And the reality is facing families in these two communities
may as well be another world away.
These differences don't happen by accident.
They are the outcome of public policy
and service planning decisions made at the center
in Wellington across health and other sectors.
These broader determinants of health shape whether, uh,
will get a head start
or whether they'll be pushing against headwinds
sometimes for generations.
And these contrasts are not u unique to our head.
You can see communities like this all across Alor.
While this bill matters is
because low cost GP services mean very little to a wau
who can't get into those services.
A wau living in a d rental
with parents doing two jobs without transport, trying
to cover prescription costs as well as increase costs
of putting food on the table.
Meanwhile, a whanau and a warm home located
and close to a GP with flexibility
and disposable income get far more benefit from
the same access.
Iwi are not an extra layer of bureaucracy.
We are strategic partners who sit closest to those families
with highest need.
IMP brings bring local knowledge and data
and relationships, lived experience
and the solutions from our people
to deliver better health outcomes.
Not just for Maori, but for everyone in our community.
As we know, our Copa Maori services,
they attract huge numbers of non, non Maori too.
Unlike a private provider,
or to be honest, even a government department,
our iwi still will be here in 200 years time caring
for our people and all those who call out or head home.
Our opposition to this bill is clear.
However, to start with the positive,
we do support its intent to improve the effectiveness
of health services, noting Maori makeup,
at least 20% of patients.
We also strongly support retaining equity
and eliminating Maori health disparities
in the purpose statement.
But beyond that, we believe too many provisions in this bill
are regressive and undermine.
Its very aim if enacted, they will worsen outcomes for Maori
and other population groups
and cost every taxpayer more in the long run.
Our written submission details these concerns
and constructive recommendations.
Today, I'll highlight four key points.
The number one, make health sector accountable for equity.
The bill lacks requirements for the sector to set out
and report on what they're doing to achieve equity.
In other words, it has no teeth.
We recommend requiring the New Zealand health plan
and other health reports to set out
and track what equity improvements are being made
and what is planned next.
What gets monitored can get changed.
Two, retain IP B's statutory purpose and functions.
IBS must remain strategic partners to help you not reduce
to advisory only.
Our current mandate is a practical reflection of the crown
to DT relationship to co-design systems and lift outcomes
and make people's lives better.
Removing this mandate breaches treaty rights
and it turns us to failed centralized systems
that will cause more Maori suffering and premature deaths.
Many from conditions that are completely preventable
and a well-functioning health system.
We ask that you be on the right side of history for the sake
of three.
Strengthen h max accountability to Iwi Maori.
We support their statutory purpose,
but it must also be accountable
to Iwi Maori given its influence on the Minister
and Health New Zealand board and our written submission.
We've suggested practical mechanisms for
that accountability,
but enable some representation from iwi Maori partner
boards on the hvac.
Number four, strengthen cross sector accountability.
And I can't say this long
or hard enough, strengthen cross sector accountability.
As my example of the two communities shows health problems
cannot be fixed by the health sector alone.
What is the point of reducing wait times at ED
for a young child with pneumonia if
that same child is going back
to a cold D home when they're discharged?
The bull should mandate government agencies to work together
and to partner with iwi Maori partnership boards
to address the wider determinants of health.
For example, housing, education, income, transport,
and our natural environment.
We need to leverage the skills
and resources of all sectors for the health
and wellbeing of our communities.
In closing, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair,
we have significant concerns with this bill.
We urge select committee to retain
and build the positive gains made under the
current legislation.
We do not want to return to failed
and neither do you one size fits all models
that serve no one.
Well, I want to conclude with the words of another UNA
care for the people, the small, the great all of us.
I'm happy to answer any parts you may have.
Excellent, thank you. Um,
and I apologize for, um, getting kicked off just as
as as you were starting.
I had a few, a few technical issues.
So, uh, do we have any questions from the panel?
No, I don't. I don't see any, any questions.
But we have, um, we do have officials online.
We've received your oral submission, uh, oral submission,
and we also have your written submission.
So really appreciate the time
and effort you've taken, uh, to submit
to the committee today.
So tha thank, thank you very much,
Dr. Campbell Kola.
Excellent. Now, we'll now move to our next submitter.
Who is Terry Taylor? Welcome Terry. Good to see you again.
Um, Terry, uh, a as you know, I'm Hamish Campbell
and we've got other members of the Health Select
Committee here online.
We also have our officials.
We've received your written submission, um,
and we've allocated five minutes for your time.
Um, so I'll hand it over to you now.
Uh, Kia Koto, uh, Hamish,
and the rest of the members there.
Um, and thank you very much again
for this opportunity to speak here.
Um, I'm a specialist cancer medical laboratory scientist
here in Dunedin with over 30 years experience in that field,
but also 15 years, uh,
professional governance experience in New Zealand as well.
Um, I've actually been part of this whole, uh, health
and disability review from its very inception
back in the early days
and right through the whole process to now and of late.
I've been involved with a lot of patient advocacy groups,
uh, particularly giving medical science advice, just a few.
We things. I, I support some things in the, in the bill
and others that I oversee have put in my written submission
that I don't really agree with in any way.
The removal of the New Zealand Health Charter Tam Maori
Orono is a, is a massive issue here
for us on the workforce front.
Um, that's a foundation document that was drawn up by a lot
of, uh, very prominent people across the sector,
across the health sector,
and also had professional union involvement.
I feel that we are going back to the days if you remove that
of basically a union versus employer approach to,
to put things on the table, which is not always ideal.
And I mean, our sector's a classic example of
that in pathology where we've had two years
of ongoing issues, which are quite frankly,
uh, still not resolved.
One of the other issues that I would, uh, I note in the,
in the legislations to do with the Public Service Act,
and of course all public servants are covered by that,
and we've just had some discussion
and previous submissions around that.
Um, my view on that is, or mine
and our professions actually view on that is, well,
why doesn't that transfer over to any of the PPP situations
where we have private organizations
doing publicly funded work?
Why do they not come under the Public Services Act
as it is all, as as it is all money, um, that's being paid
by Health New Zealand, for example.
Anyway, so we, with that, we wanna see an open
and transparent data release.
And the other big issue is the fact
that the Crown observers should be able to,
to also have oversight of anything, anyone
that's involved in A PPP.
We don't seem to have that authority at the moment.
Now the other issue that I raised in my submission was
around health targets.
They're fantastic. Everything post-diagnosis is,
is pretty much covered off there.
What about pre-diagnosis?
Uh, there's nothing there from the actual time
of request to diagnosis.
Surely that's a big missing link in the whole target
system, so to speak.
And realistic, it's like a hands-off approach,
which we most certainly don't agree with.
It doesn't give a a true indication of what's going on
as far as, um, the strategy side of it
and obviously everything under the health plan
and strategies that are there.
We, we agree with that.
But what about the long-term rare disorders strategy
that hasn't been implemented?
What about the precision health
and genomic strategy, which is absolutely critical.
And then I'd move to another one, which would be the point
of care, um, national strategy, particularly
for rural out route reach, um, as well.
And look, just to finish off here, um,
there's also something that we would like to see,
and I've actually been involved
with the patient advocacy groups on this,
and I know it's been in front of select committee,
but we really would like to see a clause
to see the implementation of a patient safety commissioner
that sits along the Health Quality and Safety Committee, um,
but also has a significant intervention
and proactive prevention role.
Uh, we don't have that at the moment.
The Health and Disability Commissioner tends
to be a retrospective assessment.
So it's our vision that we would like
to see something more proactive, uh, where there's actually,
where there's actually able to be intervention via
through patients or workforce that gives a pathway
where things can actually be changed
before major things start happening.
So I guess, um, that pretty much gives a summary of it.
And, and as I always say, um, often,
often medical science has forgotten about in a lot of, a lot
of healthcare situations
and being a cancer diagnostic scientist,
I think we've got significant opportunity to,
to have much more front foot intervention.
You'll all be very well aware.
We still have no operational pathology governance in
New Zealand, for example.
So we're, we're a bit
of a loose cannon operating all over the
SEC sector, so to speak.
So I hope there's some really robust discussion when this
does go back for the reading back in Parliament,
and I'm sure there'll be, uh, lots of chances there
to get some of this online.
But I offer my services as I always do.
If you need any advice on this, just contact me.
Excellent, Terry, thank you for that
and thank you for, for your unique perspective
that you bring, bring to this bill.
So, so thank you very much. I don't see any hands up.
Um, so, um, tha thank you very much for taking the time
and putting the thought into both your oral and,
and your written submissions.
Really, really do appreciate it. Excellent.
We now will move to the Australian
and New Zealand College of Anesthetists.
Um, I do believe we have Rachel and Marilyn on online.
Uh, welcome to Rachel and Marilyn. Um, I'm Hamish Campbell.
I'm chairing the subcommittee
of the Health Select Committee.
Uh, we have your written submission.
Um, we have allocated 10 minutes
for your oral oral submission.
I'll hand that time over to you now.
Uh, thank you Hamish. My name Nina. My name is Dr.
Rachel Dempsey. I'm a specialist anesthetist in Wellington
and chair of the New Zealand branch of Ancar,
the Australian New Zealand College of Anesthetists
and Faculty of Pain Medicine.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to our submission,
which we'll take as read, Ancar in common
with other medical colleges strongly opposed
to this bill In reversing the key elements
of the widely supported RO act, we are seriously concerned
that the bill will make it harder to assure
safe cost-effective healthcare for all New Zealanders
and increase unacceptable
and unsustainable health disparities
and will never give negatively impact the health workforce.
We question whether there is a need to change the act
and challenge the bills misguided approach
to cost effectiveness
and financial accountability, erosion of health principles
and dismantling of Maori health leadership and autonomy.
The health system presents
both challenges and opportunities.
Health needs appear infinite, but resources of finite.
Unfortunately, there's a huge body of public health evidence
to inform cost-effective policy
and governance decision making.
The PIORA Healthy Futures Act embodied that e evidence
approach approach to improving health population,
which is predicted on inclusion.
Cultural safety and equity was developed collectively
after decades of health system restructuring
and centuries of health inequity, especially for Maori
with cross sector and consumer input.
A shared vision which the purpose of the act articulates
the contrast of this bill could not be more stark.
There's been no engagement, no obvious imperative
for the amendments in swapping the order of the Maori
and English titles as other recent legislation.
And health regulation does a fundamental misapprehension of
what advances and lifts population health.
This is an, this is an overall lack of understanding
of the evidence and orchestration, the orchestration
of legislative change across many sectors, primarily as it
to remove the te obligations
and assert the dominance of English language.
That concerns us because we stand to lose so much of
what we have gained regarding cost effectness
of and inequity.
As anesthetist, we rely on education
and training to ensure safe and effective practice.
However, we know
that outcomes vary significantly across different population
groups and particularly
that Maori experienced delays in diagnosis, reduced access
to treatment and poorer postoperative
outcomes compared to non Maori.
These disparities are not intentional,
but they're undeniable
and they're the re core result
of systemic issues within the healthcare system.
Health equity is not only the right thing to do,
it's also cost effective.
Culturally safe practices grounded in Maori knowledge
and understanding have proven to improve health outcomes.
Removing the kaba and malang Maori requirements from
decision making would undermine these advancements
and is counterproductive.
The focus of the bill on short-term service targets rather
than long-term equity goals is concerning.
If we continue to measure success purely
by metrics like volume and time rather than quality
and equity, we perpetuate perpetually perpetuating
inequality inequities.
We have recommended incorporated measures such
as patient outcome for outcome quality such
as patient reported outcome measures
and patient reported experience measures, particularly
with surgical outcomes.
I'll hand over to Marilyn now
Marilyn, you're you're still on mute, so
I'm, thank you.
Sorry, just all that, uh, call Marilyn Head.
I'm the senior policy advisor for, um,
Australian New Zealand, um, college of, uh, um, anesthetists
and faculty pain medicine.
I'm talking first to the health principles,
which are foundational principles rooted in Titi
or Wang and the health charter.
They are what ensure a fair
and safe environment for healthcare.
They provide a shared understanding of
what constitutes ethical country, culturally competent care.
The bill's removal of these principles is destabilizing
and risks eroding trust in the healthcare system.
Although they are in part particular to New Zealand.
Um, the principles were developed within the
global context of health.
And for our very high proportion
of internationally qualified medical professionals,
they serve as a common framework for practice.
We already face challenges with retention with most 60%
of international medical graduates leaving New Zealand
within two years of registration
and an increasing number moving to Australia,
our own trained, um, medical graduates moving to Australia,
removing these fundamental,
universally shared principles simply makes it less safe
to practice here, and that will make it harder to recruit
and significantly retain a skilled workforce,
especially when those pro professionals can move
to environments where they are supported
and can practice safely.
The most important thing to doctors, it's not
so much the paycheck, um, but, um,
and particularly for those that are well established,
can't pay people any extra,
but what matters to them is that they can do their job well
and safely in a trusted environment.
The health sector principles in the health charter underpin
everything that happens and that's expected
to happen in a health setting.
They make a difference to fairness
and good outcomes, uh,
very important factors in retaining our health workforce.
Moving on to the marginalization of Maori health leadership.
We know that Maori health outcomes are
amongst the worst in the country,
and the Piora Act was specifically designed
to begin addressing those inequities
and to put in straight place structures.
With this bill removes tka.
Maori Health Authority has already been disestablished,
but the Iwi Maori partnership boards are reduced
to an advisory role, no longer holding decision making power
or any sort of, um, strong role in health governance.
The bed and bids, um,
bids a shift towards a more centralized ministerially
controlled system and undermines the principles
of partnership and equity that the Piora Act sought
to establish that's regressive
and harmful to Maori health outcomes.
While there may be some perceived benefits
of the bill's proposed targets, evidence suggests
that these initiatives will not ajo address the root
causes of health inequity.
Instead, they risk in exacerbating disparities, especially
for Maori, by focusing on tertiary level services rather
than strengthening primary healthcare,
and by excluding the expertise of Maori health leaders
and cultural knowledge from decision making processes.
I'll pass back to Rachel to could sum up.
So what am I worried about
as a medical practitioner on the front line, if you like?
Um, it's a bit of an unknown to us clinicians.
Remember, we are doctors. We are not policy experts.
What am I seeing? We could have a board
with an unknown composition
and experience in health setting US targets
for elective surgery for our ever increasingly complex
workload, thinking
that private outsourcing is the ultimate panacea.
If it doesn't all work in the public system being told,
we need efficient
and quality care, which don't necessarily go hand in hand.
Quality can take more time in many ways.
Meanwhile, we see our workforce burnout, trying
to manage the ever increasing emergency surgery work,
which weren't caught to out towards those
targets of elective surgery.
Much of this might have been reduced if we have
invested in public health and primary care,
the moral injury we'll see in our workforce
as they lack the support
to treat their patients in a culturally safe
manner that they want to.
And as we watch the already unacceptable equity gap,
widen powerless to speak up
and advocate for our patients in the
interests of neutrality.
In conclusion, ANCA does not support this bill.
It undermines the principles of equity, cultural safety, um,
and evidence-based policy that our foundation know
to improving the health outcomes of all New Zealanders
and especially Maori.
We urge that the committee cons Committee
to risk reconsider this bill
and take a more collaborative poach
that strengthens rather than weakens the health system.
We thank you for your time
and we're happy to answer any questions.
Excellent. Thank you. Um, can I just ask
how has consultation
with your membership informed the submission?
Um, I'm happy to answer that Order, Mr. Chair? Yes.
Yep. Yeah, Mr. Mr.
Chair, the opposition, uh, uh, opposes this effort
to undermine, um, the submitters, uh, by, um,
uh, suggesting that when the government
required this committee process to be rushed,
brought forward, a hugely political bill
did not engage the public on submissions,
including expert groups like the ones we're hearing from now
prior to the drafting of this bill.
Then trying to imply
that the submitters haven't done their job when the
government has brought up the situation is unacceptable.
And I ask you to withdraw the question.
Uh, look, um, I appreciate that.
Um, but the thing is, I think that question i i is an order.
It's no, there's no implication there at all.
Um, it is about consultating
widely in in health healthcare sector.
I, I do note, do note your objection, um,
and the submitters can choose not
to answer the question if they don't want to.
Um, I'm happy to answer that question.
Um, we've, um, over a thousand members, um, in, uh, Arto
and, um, considerably more in, in Australia.
Um, we have a number of committees, New Zealand committees,
and, um, the consultation notice, um, goes out to all
of them, um, straight away
and to our faculty of pain medicine
and chapter of perioperative medicine.
So it's widely, um, circulated.
Our consultations are widely circulated amongst, um, those,
uh, committee members who are closely,
who are representative of, um, people in the profession
and, um, who, um, get together regularly.
So it's the first way.
We also have, um, regular newsletters, um, that we, um,
you know, that, that we circulate.
And this bill has come
after, um, other bills like the medicines amendment bill
and the Ang principles bill, uh, where we're saying a lot
of the, um, you know, where we are seeing a lot of the same,
uh, sorts of, um, measures, the same proposals to remove
Maori or to, you know, put English words at the front
or, you know, those sorts of things to remove principles,
to centralize power, um, uh, uh, ministers
to remove expertise from, um, expert groups from, you know,
to just make ministerial appointments of whoever the person
feels is qualified,
but with actually having no, um, mandated, um,
skills required.
This, this, these things have been, um, in many bills
this year and, and to last.
And so they have been an intense source of discussion
amongst all our members for quite a long time.
Um, and as we've said in our health sector, you know,
talking about the health health sector principles
and the PIORA Act, there was a lot of consultation there
that people knew what was going on.
And, um, Dr. Vall is correct, you know, this bill,
although it was bits of it was signaled, it did come
as a surprise, and we didn't have a lot of time
to consult on the specifics,
but in terms of the themes, um,
it was very clear what was going on.
We also took advice, um, from our Australian colleagues
as well, um, you know, who could feed in the principles
and that obviously we're international.
Brilliant. Well, well, thank, thank you very much
for, for, for that answer.
Uh, we are at time, uh, so we do need to move
to our next submitter, but I want to thank you both
for taking the time to be online
and also for the effort, um,
and thought put into your written submission as well.
So we now will move to our next submitter,
which is the Rainbow Support Collective,
and I do believe we have Kate Collins on online.
Um, is Kate, Kate there, Jordan, Kate, welcome to this,
uh, subcommittee of House Select Committee.
I'm Hamish Campbell. I'm chairing the session.
We've got various members, um, online.
Um, we have have your written submission.
Um, we've allocated 10 minutes for your oral submission.
Um, I'll hand that time over to you now.
Koto. My name is Kate.
I'm speaking on behalf of the Rainbow Support Collective.
Thank you to the committee for the opportunity for us
to speak to this bill today,
which we are submitting in opposition to.
We are a collective of services providing day-to-day support
for rainbow people around, including mental health services,
peer support, healthcare systems, navigation, um,
systems change, advocacy
and professional development for service providers
and information resources.
Our collective includes national and regional organization
and includes organizations whose particular specialized
expertise and is in supporting transgender people,
intersex people, and rainbow young people
according to the legislation.
The purpose of this bill is to improve the effectiveness
of health services delivery to patients.
We strongly dispute the presumption
that this can be achieved without a major change in
government philosophy,
which results in a major increase in funding
for the healthcare system.
In our written submission, we outlined
that we see two major functions of this bill.
One is rooted in colonization
and the other is rooted in austerity.
Neither of these will provide a better,
will provide better healthcare services for rainbow people,
or in the long term for anyone else,
while we do ultimately want, um, more effective delivery
of healthcare services.
This bill is a transparent, transparent attempt
to paper over the cracks and avoid the necessary investment.
Repealing the healthcare systems,
healthcare sector principles is a decision designed
to repeal the requirements for the healthcare systems
to deliver equitable results for Maori,
including adequate resourcing for services, designed
for Maori consultation with Maori on service design,
and a priority for healthcare strategy
to meet the needs of Maori.
Although the bill claims to expand thero the role of the
Maori Advisory Committee to account for this amendment,
it is a clear reduction in the commitment from the Crown
to uphold responsibilities.
Under further to this,
the bell propose prioritizes over Tara Maori
and the ACT itself, which should be acknowledged
as the virtue signaling that it's
our collective expects member organizations
to have a commitment to upholding, to tei,
and we expect the crown to do the same.
And we are well aware that doing so can be complicated
and difficult, and we all make mistakes.
However, a deliberate move
to rollback legislation designed specifically
for decolonization is not tolerable.
Our RSC member Tura wrote an open letter objecting
to the dissolution of the Maori Health Authority signed
by RSC members and many other prominent rainbow people
and healthcare providers.
It is worth noting again, now that we still see
that legislation being passed under urgency as an act
of extraordinary bad faith.
With regard to rainbow people, specifically,
there was a requirement for the Maori Health Authority
to hold expert knowledge on the needs of takatapui,
which was the first acknowledgement of takatapui
as a population and legislation kudo recommended at the time
that the requirement to deliver for the needs
of TAKATAPUI should be transferred
to the Ho Maori Advisory Committee.
This legislation now piles all of the responsibility
for delivering healthcare equity for all Maori onto
that one committee whose only power is to advise,
which further limits the scope for the committee to deliver
for Pui repealing the healthcare sector
principles along with this, their strategic
and holistic approach,
including wider public health acknowledgement, pushing
for a responsive and innovative healthcare sector,
and also the health charter with its focus on the wellbeing
of healthcare sector workers with a simplistic
and reductive goal of quality
and timely access to serve health services is asinine
and is particularly concerning that the requirement
for services to be scaled by need,
which is outlined in the current sector principles,
is being replaced by a push for timeliness.
We know, having seen it
before, that the result is fewer people having access
to healthcare through denied referrals
and people getting kicked off wait lists.
The illusion of shorter wait times is not worth sacrificing
actual health outcomes.
For much of our submission focused on our experiences
as advocates for an especially underserved population,
we have found in our interactions
with healthcare sector officials ministry, the Ministry
of Health and Ministers of Health
to be consistently frustrating.
I would be the first to readily agree
that the healthcare system bureaucracy is out of touch.
The needs of the populations we support
and represent, including our own needs as part
of those populations have been routinely neglected.
And there is no conception within the healthcare system
of just how much animosity our communities hold towards it.
The purpose of bringing up these experiences was
to emphasize that we have as much incentive as anyone
to support a move to tear down that part of the system
and redistribute resources to frontline services
who do actually provide us with the healthcare we need.
However, we still object to this bill,
the legislation replaces the ineffective strategies
that neglect the needs of people with targets
that ignore the systemic needs
of the entire population of New Zealand.
Another particularly concerning addition is the requirement
for Health New Zealand to work
with private sector providers.
While this is a situation that holds nuance
and obviously the healthcare system should have
consideration for those services, we fear that this is part
of a move towards the privatization of healthcare.
There are zero examples where privatization has led
to a better population, health outcomes
and out underserved populations like ours would be the most
adversely evicted by privatization.
Finally, I would like to point out the irony of governments
who have pedantically felt the need to specify that
that political neutrality should be specified in the
legislation for the healthcare system.
While the cabinet of that same government have leaned on the
provision of puberty blockers
and an unprecedented display of politicizing of healthcare,
not only has this government let culture wars dictate
healthcare PO policy for a particular provision
for the particular provision
of puberty blockers for trans young people.
The release of the national guidelines
for all gender affirming healthcare, including care
for adults, which is the majority population who seek it,
has been delayed because
of cabinet's refusal to make that decision.
Perhaps a more honest clause would be to stipulate
that the healthcare system must
maintain politically political neutrality only in instances
where political engagement may benefit Maori.
But politics are necessary when it comes
to refusing services for trans people.
It is very hard for us to believe that any part
of this bill has been proposed in good faith
or to have a dialogue when there is no consensus
that healthcare is a human rights
or that the government has a, has a responsibility
to deliver the highest attainable standard of care.
That's, that's the end.
Excellent. Thank. Thank you, Kate.
Um, do we have any questions from the panel?
No, we don't, don't appear to have any.
But, um, we have received your written submission, um,
and we do want to thank you for the time taken
for a very thoughtful oral submission.
So really do appreciate the time
and effort you've taken to submit to the subcommittee.
So thank, thank you very much, uh,
for a very articulate oral, oral submission.
Uh, we now will move to our next submitter,
which is in New Zealand College of Public Health Medicine.
I do believe we have Colin with us,
and we may be being joined by Anna, uh, Stevenson.
Uh, so welcome to the
subcommittee of the Health Speak Committee.
I'm Hamish Campbell. Uh, we have got your, um,
written submission.
We have a number of, uh, panel, uh,
select committee members online.
We also have our officials, officials online now.
Um, so I'll hand over the 10 minutes to you now
for your oral submission.
Thank you very much. Uh, 10 na tu uh, car.
Thank you for this opportunity.
The New Zealand College of Public Health Medicine
is the professional body representing the medical specialty
of public health medicine and New Zealand.
Um, um, I am, uh, Colin, uh, Tonga, the current president,
and my colleague Anna, is the president elect.
We have, uh, 256, uh, members, including 190
actively practicing, uh, public health, uh, medicine.
Public health medicine is the branch of medicine that deals
with population health, keeping people well, um, policy
and strategy, health promotion, the control
and prevention of disease and organization of services.
We take, our written submission is read,
and today we just want to highlight some, uh, key points.
Uh, our position is that the, uh,
we welcome the Bill's intent to improve the effectiveness
of health services, uh, delivery to patients.
However, we do not believe that this bill will achieve
that to be effective.
A health system must deliver effective services in the most
effective way to the people
for whom services are most likely to improve health.
While we support some proposals in the bill,
we find the net effect of the amendments will be
to reduce the quality
and effectiveness of health services
for populations experiencing inequitable health outcomes.
As such, we, we are opposed
to this bill for Maori.
The bill, uh, is a potential, uh, disaster.
It's a major step backwards. Why?
Well, health system principles that made equity
and obligations
and explicit part of how we
plan deliver services will be repealed.
Health New Zealand's requirement to work directly
with Iwi Maori partnership boards will be offset
and the Maori decision making, uh, will shift from local
to mostly national advisory roles.
The requirement that Health New Zealand boards must have
expertise in te on equity
and Ava Maori will be withdrawn.
Health New Zealand will no longer be required
to have the capacity to understand cultural safety
and responsiveness of services.
Mata, Ranga, Maori, and Maori perspectives on services.
These changes are deeply regressive, contrary
to the recommendations in the Y 2 5 7 5 health services
and outcomes inquiry, inquiry
and undermine by Maori formal Maori community approach
to health and approach
that has been highly successful in improving health
outcomes, both in recent times and in the past.
We are strongly opposed to these changes
and believe that the net impact will be to erode, uh,
significant outcomes
and achievements, uh, in health equity for Maori,
we do not support repealing the New Zealand health charter
provisions of the act.
The charter was developed through extensive consultation
with the health workforce and represents the distillation
of this effort, including members of our college.
It is int intentionally focused on workplace, uh, culture.
The health workforce is a critical part of our health system
and key enabler to improving the health
and wellbeing of New Zealanders.
There is clear evidence that staff will feel valued
and cared for and are healthy themselves,
contribute significantly to health service quality,
including patient safety and wellbeing.
Repealing the charter disregards the process
by which it was developed,
and it is the complete opposite of valuing our workforce.
It'll not be good for wellbeing of staff and patients.
The bill is also a missed opportunity
to enhance the effectiveness
through greater emphasis on public health,
including strengthening prevention and population health.
In fact, we believe this bill has the opposite effect
and will be damaging to public health.
For example, it is difficult to understand the rationale
behind the amendment to remove the requirement
for ministerially appointed members of the
expert advisory committee on public health
to have collective expertise in population health,
health equity, orgi epidemiology,
health surveillance, health promotion and protection,
and preventive health.
These are areas of fundamental components of,
uh, public health.
This bill weakens public health at a time when the need
for effective public health solutions is greater than ever.
Public health expertise will be critical in mitigating
current and expected challenges to the burden of disease.
In our, we wish to remind the committee
at a time when the need
for effective public health solutions is greater than ever,
public health expertise will be critical.
And, uh, a systematic review of high income countries,
including New Zealand, has estimated that investing $1
in public health interventions deliver us up to $14
and 30 cents in benefits.
We do not believe it is necessary to amend the objective
and function of Health New Zealand to specify
that prevention and health promotion should involve
collaboration with, uh, private healthcare providers.
Private healthcare providers are by definition focused
on the provision of healthcare usually, uh, treatment,
and may I say, um, patients with the least likely
to have, uh, complications.
In other words, the easy ones,
they include private hospitals
who mainly offer planned surgical procedures.
They generally do not have expertise in areas
of preventing disease, promoting health,
and addressing the causes of, uh, ill health
on climate change.
Uh, in the health principles.
In the original pie
or act, climate change was specifically identified
as a key determinant of health that needs to be addressed
with the repeal of these principles
and this bill, it is of serious concern
that our foundational health legislation
will no longer have a single mention of, uh, climate change.
Climate change is the biggest threat to the health
and wellbeing of people
and communities in our New Zealand and around the world.
We believe this bill must recognize climate change
as a key determinant of health.
Finally, while we, uh, support the new objective
of Health New Zealand relating to the provision, provision
of financially sustainable infrastructure, we ask
that this be modified to specify
that infrastructure be environmentally as well
as financially sustainable.
Um, the health sector, by the way, contributes an estimate.
It's between three and 8%
of New Zealand's total carbon dioxide equivalent emissions,
and generates a considerable amount of, uh, waste.
We do not support the amendment
to include selected targets in, uh, legislation
or the requirement for all future government statements
to include these targets.
And we question the proposed addition of obligations
that apply to Health New Zealand in individuals
to uphold public service principles, including the principle
of, uh, political neutrality.
Uh, let me, uh, conclude by saying
that the college fully supports efforts
to improve health system effectiveness along
with well-documented population inequities.
We are concerned about the sustainability
of the current health system as a whole.
We're very concerned
that despite the Bill's laudable intent, it
represents a missed opportunity to improve the effectiveness
of the entire system.
Many of the amendments that are proposed are unnecessary,
while others would erode the achievements of equity
for Maori and others and will undermine public health
accordingly, we are opposed to this bill
and recommend that it not be
progressed. Thank you very much.
Excellent. Thank you. Colin. I see the hand, uh,
Aisha's got her hand up.
Yeah. Thank you very much for your submission.
Uh, so Colin, I have, uh,
two questions if the chair will permit me.
Um, the bill represents the government's view on how
to make the health system delivery more effective
through legislating for targets.
Could you please describe
what a population health approach would see
as an effective way of driving health system performance
against population health outcomes?
Let me start, and my colleagues, uh, might add to this.
When affected communities are fully engaged,
informed, resourced,
and trusted, positive outcomes will
naturally be, um, uh, the outcome you
targets are a tool, uh, one way
of trying to achieve something.
But as I say, more sustainable interventions,
more beneficial interventions are ones that are trust
and engage, uh, the communities.
And, uh, so that in our view would be a population,
uh, type approach to achieving desirable, uh, outcomes.
Anna?
Alright. I think another approach, um,
that we've mentioned in our submission is around, um,
this disease prevention
and health promotion, which recognizes that a,
a functioning clinical healthcare system is a very,
very important component of achieving good health
and wellbeing in our population.
But actually, as I'm sure you're aware, Isha, you know
that the biggest determinants of health life
outside of our health system.
So what we would be recommending is, um, what's, um,
technically called a health
and all policies term, um, approach.
So we might say, um,
we might ask different government departments to consider
what the impacts of their work are
and their policy making are on population health,
for example, um, a a really easy example is transport.
You know, how does the, um, work of the transport sector
help to reduce obesity rates in our population,
which then drives diabetes rates,
which then drives hospital admissions and illness
and morbidity in our, in our sector.
That's not something that doctors, that nurses,
that hospitals can do anything about.
But, um, sectors outside of healthcare can do a lot.
Thank you. And if the chair will permit me a very narrow
second question, quick, quick one.
Your submission, uh,
notes about everybody partnership boards, uh,
a potential concern about conflicts
of interest in their role in deme, uh, direct commissioning.
And you argue that these conflicts can be managed.
Can you please explain in a practical way how, uh,
an iwi Maori partnership board
and direct commissioning might reflect those, um,
might address those conflicts when, um, uh,
those same iwi would be a major providers of services in,
in the, those, those areas?
I mean, I think the standard, um, the standard way
that people address those conflicts of interest is
to declare them and to be very transparent about them.
And depending on the issue, you know, the size of it, um,
you might need certain individuals on the board
to stand aside or you might need
to bring in an independent person.
But I mean, I don't think we're looking at anything
different than, than approaches that already exist
to manage conflicts of interest.
Can I just add that, uh, it's important
to be sensible about these things is a small, uh, community,
inevitably, uh, there'll be people involved in some shape
or form and, and as Anna is, disclosure is a good, uh,
first step, but we also gotta be sensible
and realistic about
how we manage these potential, uh, conflicts.
Thank you. Um, and can I just ask a
bit of a cheeky question?
Um, Colin, you mentioned
that I might have got the wording slightly wrong, that it,
it's a time of greatest need of public health, um,
but at a time when we're probably living longer
and healthier than we ever have
before, what, what do you mean by that?
Oh, uh, uh, the, uh, burden of disease,
the risk, uh, factors, uh, the, uh, access,
uh, philosophies of people who make these, uh, decisions.
The attack on science, the attack on vaccinations,
the whole thing seems to be
coming together at a point in time when, as you say,
we are living longer and inevitably people will need, uh,
more and more complex, uh, health, uh, uh,
health system, uh, responses.
That's what I mean. I think at a time when we want
to be efficient, uh, in dealing with the, uh, great, uh,
health challenges, not only the science
and the information that informs that is being challenged,
but of course, uh, the, the pressure
and the demands on, on, on the system is even more complex.
And if I could just ask, um,
that we might be living longer,
but that, um, healthy life expectancy isn't keeping up
with life expectancy.
So no chronic
Diseases That, well, not just chronic diseases, um,
but that, that gap, you know, we're living healthly to,
you know, nominally 70 and then we're dying at 80.
Um, so we've got 10 years when we are not actually very well
at all and not living a life or wellbeing,
and that don't
numbers that place increasing.
And the other really important issue is the, um,
the changes in health equity, which, uh,
have been going very, very slowly in the right direction,
but that seems to have stalled more recently.
And, you know, there's a lot of, uh, evidence that suggest
that we'd be heading in the
direction we don't want be heading in.
Excellent. Very Quick,
very quick.
Sorry, we have probably gone to 15 minutes,
so I do do need, do, need to move on.
Uh, thank, thank, thank you very much for, for those, uh,
answers and the very thought out, uh, submission.
We now will move to Arthritis New Zealand.
Um, and do we have Philip, uh, online? Yes, we do.
Brilliant, excellent, Philip. Well welcome
and good to see you again.
Welcome to the subcommittee of the Health Select Committee.
Um, as you know, I'm, I'm Ham Campbell.
I'm chairing this, uh, subcommittee.
Um, we have your written submission, um,
and we have allocated, um, 10 minutes
for your oral submission.
Uh, so I'll hand that time over to you now,
Uh, Q Hamish and,
and hello select committee meeting of people.
I'll remove these chips for the moment, so we know that
that's got some relevance to
what we'll be talking about at some stage fairly shortly.
Um, and obviously like to introduce, uh, Francesca Holloway
that you both will all know very well as indeed.
So I'll get Francesca to start. Mm-hmm.
Uh, we'll be doing this together as a bit of a, a team
approach and leave some time for questions afterwards.
So first of all, thank you to the committee for, um,
granting us permission to speak to you.
We very much appreciate that.
We are speaking on behalf of people with arthritis
that's over 750,000 people,
and we have adopted the position of less is more
and looking at the recommendations that we can make
that have come out as being most relevant
to people with arthritis.
So we are not giving our own views,
we are reflecting our consumer input
and the consumer views that have been expressed
to us in some cases quite forcefully.
So I'll start off with, um, one area of comment has been,
um, increasing the use of private providers.
And while people who have accessed surgery
through private providers have been very pleased
to get their surgery, there has also been concern expressed
about their long-term implications such as the staff
and costs, the leaving of complex cases to the public system
and the running down of the public system, particularly
around staffing issues.
And the other issue for us is, given that, um, use
of private providers is tended to be, uh,
using private hospitals for orthopedic surgery for people
with arthritis, is that people don't necessarily know
that there are other options besides surgery.
And that in fact, um,
MSK hospital pathway has been introduced around the country
and just had some more funding that, uh,
is actually provides a really good non-surgical pathway, uh,
sometimes for people who thought
that surgery was their very last option.
We have some very positive, um, stories
that we can tell about people
who found a non-surgical approach to be really good.
And in that respect, um, the importance
of the public health system, uh, is primary.
Hello, right. Second point is
around the Iwi Maori partnership boards.
Um, obviously we really, uh, feel that they need
to be kept in their current, uh, status and role.
Um, and it was interesting just to listen
to the previous speaker talk about communities
and how you have engaged resource
and trusted elements within that community
to provide a very powerful primary care service.
Um, and we would reiterate that
through the Iwi Maori partnership boards.
This is critical because not only will they provide support,
they'll provide direction, um,
but they also provide that ongoing evaluation in a way
that potential we can't do.
And we would suggest that from this, this is a critical part
of an engagement of an equity issue that, um, particularly
around gout, um, for us, is such a, an obvious way
of getting, um, buy-in within community support
and obviously then, uh,
actual change within those populations.
So from a community point of view, from an equity point
of view, the IBS are critical in terms of that voice
because most of them have truly trusted people within the
community and are leaders in their own rights.
So we would say that we, we want to, uh, voice our opinion
that we need to keep the status of the
IPVs Francesco.
Yep. And the third area that we wanna speak briefly
to is the provision
for enabling timely access to primary care.
This has received a huge response from our consumers, many
of whom have identified access to primary care
as their first priority in concern in
accessing good healthcare.
So we think it is good to have it there, uh, along
with expressing real support for this has been,
how is this going to go ahead?
What does this mean in reality? How will this be maintained?
Will this be start off well
and then revert back to what we've had to endure?
And it also reflects some cynicism,
some public cynicism around the actual delivery
of healthcare as opposed to fine words.
So yes, we support the intent very strongly,
and that's very strong consumer feedback,
but have some reservations about
how it's gonna work in practice, and now Philip will pick
Up. Yeah, and, and one of
the things though we'd like
to emphasize is that generally there's always emphasis
around primary care, where in fact, actually we think
that needs to be a much greater
emphasis on community engagement.
And in fact, with investment within community, obviously
that can relieve the, the pressure on, uh,
primary care facilities and uh, services.
The example of that is the work we've just been doing
around reclassification of allopurinol, which would mean
that actually GPS wouldn't necessarily have to, um,
bear the burden of, of appointments, et cetera.
It is all done through pharmacy.
Um, and also what we are saying is
around the community engagement is that by
actually increasing the ability to self-manage and educate
and to support, it just changes the whole dynamics of, uh,
I suppose the health, uh, engagement system.
If we have a look at it, you know, if we understand better
what, um, makes better sense around, uh,
your own self-management programs,
and we're doing this through the long-term condition
certificates, it will actually change the, the demen the,
the dynamics of the health system if we can self-manage
better, if we understand why.
And again, to come back to that, you know, trusted, um,
resourced, engaged and understanding
that health literacy is really critical.
So my issue is it does tend
to focus primarily on primary,
but we want it to also focus further upstream
around community and,
and get that relevant support at that level.
So yeah, we've just, uh, those are the three,
uh, sort of key points.
Uh, obviously we've rattled through them pretty quickly.
Happy to take any questions.
Excellent. Uh, it's, see, Jenny's got a hand up.
Jenny, fire away.
Oh, thank you very much. Couldn't find the audio button.
Um, really appreciate your, uh, submission
and thank you for appearing for the committee.
I'm really interested in what you talked about in terms
of their timely access to primary care for, uh, patients
who have or suffer arthritis.
And you, you mentioned, um, that self-management part
and also I think you were kind of hinting at not
so explicitly around educational awareness.
What does, what would that look like for you?
Yeah, um, so look, we know very clearly, um, health
literacy or education, it's a critical component
around understanding your condition and how to manage it.
Um, as Francesca's, um, indicated a lot
of people only see the option of say, getting surgery,
but in fact we know,
and studies clearly show this,
that actually nonsurgical intervention,
understanding your condition better self-management, um,
both economically and mentally
and physically, are a much better option.
So just by understanding that we change the dynamics, we,
we don't say that surgery isn't an option,
we say it's the last option,
and there is so much evidence to show
that we're not addressing this properly.
So where would that, can I find,
I may have a supplementary, so, so where would
that health literacy, that health education come in?
What at, at what level is this a GP responsibility?
Is it, uh, where does it so that we, you know, remove
that pressure on primary care also into,
into hospital and surgery?
Thank, thanks, Jenny. That's a great question
because in fact, what we're just doing is about
to launch a long-term certificate, uh, in association
with Diabetes heart
and stroke around, um, a level three certificate, NZQA,
uh, which is actually, uh, aimed at primary, uh, at, uh,
sort of sec, uh, sorry,
start again at those healthcare workers,
nonclinical workers such as ena, uh, health coaches
and people like home care workers.
So it's literally going right into community
and starting that, um, that education process there,
rather than just trying to do at a GP level
or at a, um, you know, a nurse level.
So we believe that's where we've got to start.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
I don't see any other questions, so I just want
to thank you Phillip and Francesca for once again coming
before the Health Select Committee, um,
and for your advocacy for people
with arthritis in, in New Zealand.
Thank you. Do, do appreciate your thought,
thoughtful submission, both, uh, your written and your oral.
So thank, thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank You.
Now, we'll now we'll move to our next submitter,
which is the Leukemia and Blood Cancer in New Zealand.
I do believe we have, uh, Rosie Shaw, the head
of advocacy online.
Uh, welcome Rosie. I'm Hamish Campbell.
I'm chairing this subcommittee
of the Health Select Committee.
Uh, we do have your written submission, um,
and we have allocated, um, 10 minutes for your,
um, oral submission.
So I'll hand that time to you now.
Got it. Thank you. Um, just for context, leukemia
and Blood Cancer New Zealand is a non-for-profit charity.
We are focused on improving life for people affected
by blood cancer, so that includes leukemia, lymphoma,
myeloma, um,
and there's approximately 27,000 kiwis who are affected
by this disease across New Zealand.
So we support these Kiwis through our support services,
our research program, and our advocacy efforts.
Our particular submission
to this amendment bill was focused solely on Clause 30.
So that's a clause that amens section 68
of PX statutory objective.
We note it has been presented as a technical tidy up,
but it is an opportunity for an important amendment
that will make it possible for pharmac
to undertake meaningful reform.
Um, and it's an opportunity that needs to happen,
as in its current form,
it's an outlier legislative constraint
that no other health entity is bound by.
So section 68 requires phar act
to deliver the best health outcomes from within the amount
of funding provided.
And it's this particular wording that is uniquely rigid.
It's preventing pharm act from even considering modern ways
of advising government on the full range
of clinically valuable
and cost-effective investment options.
So as a result, we have an outdated
and an outlier medicines funding process
that is undervaluing human life compared
with our international peers.
And it's delaying access to innovative treatments.
That means patients with complex
or rare conditions, as is the case
for many blood cancer patients are dis disproportionately
disadvantaged by a fixed budget model.
Now, the independent review of phar conducted in 2022
and a series of formal reports from the patient advocacy
community since then
have already reiterated this recommendation
that this rigid funding rule needs to be removed.
Uh, this bill amendment is an opportunity to act upon that.
So we are recommending
that the phrase from within the amount of funding
provided is removed
and that an opportunity
for a broader statutory objective is introduced
that can recognize clinical value, efficiency,
and wider fiscal and societal outcomes
that are possible with medicines.
And this, this would bring FX objective into line
with other comparable health systems.
And with the true intent of peor, it would enable Farm Act
to undertake a reform process that supports current
and future governments in delivering modern, equitable
and outcomes driven healthcare.
And I wanna stress that the proposed change doesn't have a
negative fiscal consequence farm act like all Crown entities
is already bound by the Public Finance Act
and the Crown Entities Act, which means it's required
to live within its appropriations.
That requirement would not change based on amending its
statutory objective.
All this amendment would do is remove a redundant
and uniquely restrictive phrase.
It would bring pharma into line
with other crown entities whilst giving it the scope
to provide government with better advice
and consider how modern medicines can best be evaluated
and funded in New Zealand.
And in fact, without this change,
medicines cannot be evaluated on a standalone basis
for the cost efficiency.
A clear example that's often felt
by the blood cancer community is
immunotherapies for blood cancer.
So they're, um, a new generation of, um,
approaches towards medical innovation.
They're often highly effective.
They can be curative in some cases,
and they can dramatically improve both
survival and quality of life.
They also offer the health system a cost-effective
investment by reducing long-term relapses,
avoiding repeated hospital admissions,
and lessening the need for intensive treatments,
immunotherapies free up resources elsewhere in the system.
Yet under P'S current statutory objective,
they're extremely difficult to fund.
Their higher upfront costs often overshadows their long-term
value because the benefits
of these therapies are spread across multiple years
and across multiple parts of the health system.
So as a summary, clause 30 is a chance to make a small
but a powerful change.
If it is left as a technical tidy up,
it is a missed opportunity
and amended as we propose it would enable P Act
to make smarter funding bids.
It would improve equity for patients with rare
and complex conditions,
and it would ensure New Zealand is ready
to adopt health innovations
that reduce demand on our health system in the long run.
So we urge the committee to seize this moment
and support a simplified statutory objective for Farm Act
that is fairer and more outcomes focused and future ready.
Excellent. Thank, thank you. Thank you, Rosie.
Um, does any of the panel have any questions?
Jenny, you're on mute. Jenny,
Sorry. Um,
trick for new players.
Uh, thank you for your submission.
Now, the recommendation that you're saying, um, uh,
in section 68, uh,
removing that phrase from within the amount of funding
provided, um, have you haven't
provided, is there a replacement, um, piece of wording
that goes in there or is it just simply remove that phrase,
Simply remove that phrase?
Um, the semantics around the new statutory objective would,
would be up to yourselves,
but ultimately removing that funding restrictions so
that it focuses on optimizing health outcomes.
Thank you. Excellent. Thank, thank you very much.
Um, and thank you for, uh, your submission reader.
Appreciate it. Um,
and the thought that's gone into both your written
and oral presentation.
So thank, thank you very much.
Um, we will now move to our next submitter,
which is Kay Jones.
Do we have Kay Online?
Excellent. Well, I see Kay has joined us.
Well, welcome to this
subcommittee of the Health Speak committee.
I'm Hamish Campbell. I'm chairing
chairing the session today.
Uh, we do have your written submission, uh,
and we have allocated five minutes
for your old presentation.
There's a number of, uh, select committee members online.
We also have our officials online now.
Um, so I'll hand that five minutes over to you,
uh, to use as you wish.
Kira, members of the committee, can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you. Thank you
for the opportunity to speak to you today.
Co k Jones Toko, my pronouns are they and them,
and I do hope that Jenny Markoff can see
me because I do exist.
I'm a fifth generation Pakeha, new Zealander
of Scottish Shetland and English heritage
and with Maori wau in my wider family.
I understand. You've read my brief submission.
Um, it's the seventh submission.
I have spoken to a select committee on this year, so I,
that's one of the reasons why this one was so short.
I endorsed the comments made
by many other submitters on the Healthy Futures
Bya Amendment bill yesterday and today,
and I have watched all of them, particularly watching those
who are speaking for Maori on the lack of consultation
and impact on Maori health.
While the explanatory note to Bill claims,
it is being patient centered, it is gaslighting.
The reality is the bill is fin focused on financial costs,
not on delivery and better health outcomes patients.
The era of the New Zealand Health Charter
and the health sector principles of TER Ang all combined
to law designed to improve people's health into one designed
to focus on financial reporting.
I was a public servant for many years,
and I further people stuck in agencies
serving this government.
Public servants and health sector workers almost universally
seek to deliver their best efforts.
But if the goal is balancing the books at the expense
of people's lives, that is placing an unfair burden on them.
People in this health system will know
that they're increasing health risks
for populations already facing unfair health burdens.
This progressed decline will further drive workers
away from the system.
They've reached the prospect of being like Conscious Pilate,
sentencing Jesus Christ to death.
We have heard ministers in this government
question the value of a human life.
Those attitudes are resulting in decisions that kill
or injure people through worse health
and safety at work from faster speeds on motorways,
enforcing people out of emergency housing
or through cutting income
and many other policy decisions,
those actions results in higher rates of illness
and hospitalizations and deaths
and make it even harder for the health system to cope.
As a former public servant,
I'm experienced in providing budgets for services, budgets
to reflect top of the line decisions in a large cost
or minimal services on a shoestring budget.
I couldn't guarantee top quality services
on a shoestring budget.
No one can in requiring Health New Zealand
to collaborate with private healthcare providers
to deliver services that an under-resourced public health
system cannot cope with.
The outcome is to spread the funds even thinner.
Private sector healthcare providers are not innately better
at providing healthcare than the public sector,
and as well as the cost of trade staff
and suitable facilities,
private healthcare providers also need
to build into their accounting profit for their owners.
By definition, private sector means for profit.
Now there's a great article on radio New Zealand outlining
concerns over costs, um, by University
of Otago health sector,
and I will forward a copy of that article to the committee
as a supplementary submission.
If the health sector is privatized even further,
it'll result either in a reduction of service quality
or an increase in costs going down the route
of less involvement in decision making
by people more vulnerable in the health system, many
of them Maori and more use of private sector
sector health services will cost lives
and further erode willingness to trust government
and reduce opportunities to have the community engagement
that the previous submitters have been talking about,
like these submitters from arthritis New Zealand.
On a personal level,
when I encountered discriminatory attitudes in a mainstream
medical practice, I switched to Maori health provider.
I benefited from the inclusive embedded in that
Maori organization, and I offer them for that welcome.
I would like all New Zealanders to be able
to experience similar support.
And that's all I have to say,
but I'm happy to take any questions.
Excellent. Well, thank, thank you. Kay.
We have about 20, 20 seconds left.
So you have, you have timed your submission very well,
but I appreciate you, you're a regular submitter at
at select committees.
Um, I don't see any, any hands up.
So we will move on to our next, next submitter,
but I want to thank you for the time you've taken, uh,
not only for submitting to this committee,
but for, for your other efforts as well.
So thank you. Thank you very
much. We now will move. Thank you.
You'll see me again as another committee.
Excellent. Thank you. We now will move
to our next submitter, uh, Paul Singh.
Uh, Paul, welcome to the Health Select Committee,
subcommittee B.
Um, I'm Hamish Campbell. I'm chairing the Committee.
Committee. Um, we have your written submission, um,
and we have allocated five minutes
for your oral presentation.
Um, I'll hand that time over to you now.
Thank you. My name's Paul
and my wife Jackie lives with young onset dementia
and is now in dementia level residential care.
I speak both as her husband, as a advocate
alongside other families across, uh, to Aurora.
I'll take my original submission as read.
I oppose this bill in its current form because time's short.
I focus on what it means for people
with young onset dementia and their families.
Young onset dementia,
like all dementia is invisible in both the 2022 Act
and this amendment bill.
The only reference is the phrase
and others Maori and specific people are named.
But it was meant to cover other vulner groups
who face health inequality
that gave Health New Zealand both the ability
and dare I say it, duty to plan services
for young onset dementia and practice.
They haven't. This bill makes it worse
by removing X principles
and replacing them with narrow performance targets.
When Jackie was at home, we went through long delays
before getting a diagnosis.
Until then, we couldn't get support.
Even though she needed help with activities of daily living,
all of them once diagnosed, the support was rationed
just three hours a week.
Now that she's in residential, excuse me, now she
that she's in den residential care.
Another, she shows up.
Younger people are often placed in each facilities sign
for those in their eighties or nineties.
They're not age appropriate.
They strip away dignity and they create trauma for families.
Families also struggle to get respite
that fits their situation across home.
Support, specialist care, respite
and residential care.
The system's patching in inadequate, that's a human cost
of being invisible in the law.
The committee has the chance to change this
at a minimum, at a minimum.
Please don't proceed with this bill in its current form.
Instead, strengthen the equity principles
and make clear that and others include dementia
and young onset dementia and other vulnerable groups.
Reinstate the reinstate the health, charter,
and health principles.
Keep independent oversight,
not concentrate power under the director, general minister
of health, protect dementia pilots and action plans.
And still, until stronger frameworks are in place,
make sure funding's transparent.
So promises are backed by resources.
Restore obligations in full,
require broad consultation, including
with vulnerable communities and groups.
This, in closing, this bill takes us backwards
at risk making already invisible groups
like families affected by young onset dementia
vanish completely from the planning and funding.
I urge you to strengthen the act not weaken it.
So families like mine are seen, supported,
and treated with dignity.
I'm happy to take your questions.
Excellent. Thank, thank you Paul.
Um, I do just want to acknowledge, um, the challenges
that your family has faced.
I do appreciate dementia.
It, um, affects not just the individual,
but the whole whole family.
Um, I don't see any hand up from any of the panels,
but don't take that as as any sign.
Um, you, you have put together a very well written, uh,
written submission, um,
and we do appreciate the time taken, uh, to come
and present to us today.
So th thank you very much
and I do just want to acknowledge your,
your lived experience.
Thank you very much and thank you for your time.
Excellent, thank you. We'll, now, um, we'll now move
to rare disorders.
I do believe, uh, rare new rare disorders,
New Zealand is online.
Um, so we'll jump jump ahead, um, to them, um,
and then we'll loop back to,
to our agenda when other people are on online.
Um, excellent.
Um, do we have rare disorders, New Zealand? Yes.
Hello. Oh, hello.
Excellent. Brilliant. Sorry, I didn't,
I'm trying to get my camera on,
but I don't seem to have control of it.
Right. Excellent. Um, sorry, I, I, I didn't,
I didn't see, see you there.
So welcome, um, to the Health Health Civic Committee.
As you're probably well aware, I'm Hamish Campbell.
Um, we have your written submission, um,
and also we've allocated 10 minutes
for an oral, oral presentation.
Um, so I'll hand that time over to you now.
Thank you. I'm just starting my
video vertically.
Um, I'll just start speaking though.
Um, Jo, thank you very much
for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Lawana Pentecost
and I'm speaking for rare disorders New Zealand,
the National Peak Body representing the voice
of the 300,000 New Zealanders living
with a rare disorder and their whanau.
A rare disorder is a medical condition
with a specific pattern of clinical signs, symptoms,
and findings that affects fewer than
or equal to one in 2000 people in Arto and New Zealand.
People with rare disorders face significant barriers
navigating the health system,
accessing services and being heard.
We acknowledge and support the overarching intent
of the bill to improve the effectiveness
of health service delivery for all New Zealanders.
However, we are concerned that without specific changes,
the bill may continue to overlook some
of the most vulnerable populations, including those
with rare disorders.
Our primary ask is
that the rare disorders strategy is written into the
legislation and like for other health strategies in the act,
it is set out that the rare disorder strategy must
contain an assessment of the current state
of the health outcomes for people living with rare disorders
and the performance of the health sector in relation
to people living with a rare disorder
and contain an assessment of the medium
and long-term trends that will affect the health
of people living with a rare disorder
and health sector performance
and set out priorities for services
and health sector improvements relating to the health
of people living with re disorders,
including workforce developments.
Sorry, I've still been unable to get my camera to go on,
but we'll continue.
That's okay. We, we can hear you.
Um, the amendment bill requires the Minister of health
to prepare and determine new health strategies within 24
months, including the re disorder strategy is one
of the legislative health strategies would ensure it remains
current and that the health system actively considers health
services for people living with rare disorders can be
improved in line with evolving national health targets.
We are concerned that without inclusion
of the rare disorder strategy,
the focus on health targets will eclipse all other
priorities and people living
with a rare disorder will be left behind
alongside this rare disorders.
New Zealand also recommends amending the act
to require all health strategies are accompanied
by action plans that outline
how objectives will be implemented and measured.
We have observed that many strategies while well-intentioned
often don't drive meaningful change
and become symbolic rather than actionable
strategies accompanied by action plans
that include mechanisms for monitoring, evaluation
and public accountability will go a lot further in improving
the effectiveness of health service delivery
for all New Zealanders than strategies that exist only
as high level commitments or aspirational goals.
In addition to this primary ask
that the disorder strategy is incorporated into the
legislation, there are other areas
of the proposed amendments that concern us.
These are expanded on in our written submission.
Um, I see you have your hand up.
Ingrid, did you have a question?
I'll just wait till the end of your
presentation. Thank you. Yes. Yeah.
Okay. Um, so I'll just touch briefly on these other areas.
The proposed removal of the health sector principles from
the ACT removes the focus
of the health sector being equitable
and ensuring that population groups have access
to services in proportion
to their health needs re disorders.
New Zealand supports retaining the health sector principles
and believe that at a minimum there needs to remain
explicit commitment in the ACT to providing equitable access
to effective and appropriate services, not just access
to quality services.
Rare disorders. New Zealand is also concerned about the
removal of specific requirements for collective knowledge
and expertise and experience to be met.
When appointing board members and ex
and expert advisory committee on public health
we support maintaining the current requirements.
The final area I'd like to speak on is the opportunity
to amend legislation related to P,
which is not currently part of the bill Rare Disorders.
New Zealand recommends amendments
to phar statutory objectives
to ensure its decision making better reflects broader
health, social, and economic outcomes,
and is aligned with recent reviews.
These changes are essential
to support the Cultural Reset Pharm Act is currently
undertaking and to shift its focus away from a narrow
emphasis on cost containment rare disorders.
New Zealand also recommends utilizing this opportunity
to strengthen pxs obligations to consult
with patient groups when it should
our recommended changes are outlined further
in our written submission.
In closing, I will note that the Ministry
of Health released the disorder strategy in 2024.
During the current government's term,
the disorders strategy made clear commitments
to integrating disorders into health system planning.
The admission of disorders from the current amendment Bill
suggests that this commitment has not been
upheld in its drafting.
The strategy states in the future,
decision makers will consider rare disorders
as they decide priorities for evolving
and changing the system.
People in their whanau living
with rare disorders will become one of the population groups
that decision makers routinely think about when designing
system improvements.
Legislating the rare disorder strategy
as a health strategy is the only way
to genuinely demonstrate commitment
to the estimated 300,000 New Zealanders
living with a rare disorder.
It would ensure they are consistently considered in future
system changes, investment decisions
and performance monitoring as is required
by the strategy itself.
This change alongside our other recommendations will help
ensure the effectiveness
of health service delivery is improved
for all New Zealanders, not just those lucky enough
to need something that is a current health target.
Thank you for your time. We appreciate your consideration
and I'm happy to take any question.
Excellent. Ingrid, Thanks for a thoughtful submission.
Um, you have repeated what we've heard from a lot
of submitters regarding the problems with the health targets
and you've talked about monitoring evaluation
and so on as being separate.
Um, and I'm just wondering,
am I hearing you correctly in saying
that you want an outcomes, um, focus on the legislation
and then separate implementation plans
and evaluation in order to meet the outcomes.
And, and if so, what does the muddying of the waters
with the targets look like in reality for people
who are in minority groups such as those
with rare disorders?
Um, yes. Thank you for the question.
Um, I think what we are referring to is that the,
the strategies that exist are sitting
as ideological documents at the moment
that don't go anywhere.
Um, and there's a lot of effort
and time that goes into writing the strategies, um,
but then they are not implemented.
And so while we do not necessarily want targets
or outcomes to be incorporated in the legislation,
we do want it incorporated
that when health strategies are written, which according
to this, um, bill,
they will all be revisited in the next two years.
They include outcome points, um,
and accountability measures, because
otherwise we are just going around in circles,
writing things down on paper without actually achieving
any meaningful change.
Um, having really set health targets
is really difficult for, um, vulnerable
and, um, smaller population groups,
and especially those with rare disorders
because there's extremely limited data.
Um, and when you cannot measure a population,
it's very difficult to then measure improvement.
Um, but we can measure the improvement in services
and things like access to genetic health services and,
and things like time to diagnosis
for specific rare disorders.
We, we could measure that kind of thing.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
I don't see any, any other questions.
So, um, we will move on to our next submitter,
but I do just want to thank you for, uh, taking,
taking the time to come
and submit to the select committee, um,
and appreciate all the work you do
and advocacy for people living
with rare disorders in New Zealand.
So thank, thank you very much.
Thank you, Hamish.
Thank you for the rest of the committee.
Excellent. We'll now move on to our next submitter,
which is puku, uh, tribal Authority.
Um, I do believe we've got D online. Um, welcome.
I'm Hamish Campbell. I'm chairing this subcommittee
of House State Committee.
Uh, we do have your written, written submission, um,
and we have allocated 10 minutes
for your oral, oral presentation.
Um, I'll hand that time over to you now.
Kiara. Thank you DI speaking.
Thank you very much for this opportunity
to present to the committee.
You have our written submission
and we appreciate this opportunity to reinforce a few
of our key messages.
You shut the door please. Thank you.
Um, I'd like to just start by saying that we toko
the previous speaker's thoughts and contributions.
That was well said. And well put.
Um, we believe that this legislation
you, that you should, we oppose it
and we believe that the legislation removes the
absolutely mandatory requirement we see for honoring.
It removes statutory equity levers,
repealing their health sector principles to Moori
and the New Zealand Health Charter.
It downgrades the Iwi Maori partnership boards
from a really important
and strengthening ability to be able
to provide very important monitoring, which was asked in the
previous speaker's question.
Um, and pretty well weakens it to local
decision making advisory.
It re decentralizes planning
and infrastructure in a way that we believe sidelines
community led solutions.
For that reason, we find these changes are regressive,
they will harm, not help the equity gains that we've made,
um, under our locality approach.
And we've positioned, um, some of our experience
under the previous legislation as a prototype.
Um, and we've outlined some of our successes in that area.
We need legislation that continues
to mandate iwi Maori community
and community that are able
to be at the decision making table.
If the government government shifts back to central control,
then local voice will be lost.
Not only Maori, but also other minority groups.
Community flexible funding enables us to respond quickly
in this legislation.
We see there an increase that narrow
or prescriptive contracts can undo our ability to pivot to
what is needed in our community and by whanau in real time.
We need to retain equity as a core focus.
It is not a nice to have.
Removing equity obligations will widen the gaps
that we've already started to close as many others
as you've stated, and on the last speaker have shared that
and is evidenced by, um, research
for eaternity.
We need the continuity of partnerships,
not stop start resets every time legislation changes.
Whanau continue to lose more
and more trust in the system, um,
and the stores for initiatives
and sudden changes are constantly restructured
and put us further behind.
We urge you to recommend that the healthy futures
pie order amendment will not proceed as it is.
If it does, it must be amended to retain equity, uphold
to titi and protect Maori involvement in governance.
So communities like that you have the statistics for
can continue to build on what's working
and be part of the solution Act actively.
Equity is not a slogan, it is the reason our wau live.
Well learn well and flourish. Happy to take questions.
Excellent. Do we have any, any questions?
No, it does, doesn't appear that we do.
Um, but once again, as I've told other submitters, um,
we do have your written submission
and do appreciate all the effort you've put in to come
and present to the committee today.
I appreciate there's a number of you standing there in,
in support as well.
Uh, so I do just want to acknowledge, uh, the whole group,
um, and di especially for, for your, for your contribution.
Really, really do appreciate it.
So we've got your in submission.
The officials have ha are in line as well.
So really, really do appreciate the effort
and thought you've put into it.
So thank you very much.
Sure. Thank you.
Excellent. Um, we don't have our next submitter online.
Um, we are running just a slightly bit earlier, um, than,
than um, our schedule.
Um, so we'll have a 10 minute break, um,
and come back at, uh, 10 35 or nine minute break.